#PáginasDiarias 

Morning pages otra vez, reencarnando en *obsidian.md*. 25 minutos de escribir sin pensar, as much as I can. A practice. Something that requires no question. Will I write today? Wrong question. Have I writen today? That's the right one. I have a sip of mate, I munch on a cookie, I need to get som money by the end of the week. What can I do? What can I offer? I need to get som money by the end of the week. You know about eOS6? It is already out and I'm needing a copy of that. I sip on my mate, I munch on a cookie, I wonder what I dreamed last night... I think it was good, I wish I remember. The dogs howl and bark, I hear their chorus right now. I wonder what to do today... I need to get some money by the end of the week. I wonder what to do today... I will have some more money by the end of the week. I wonder how will this be, I wonder how I did get so much money by the end of the week. I will shower today. I will wash my dirty socks today. I will sleep early today. I will smoke pot early and write today. I'm having some mate, I'm enjoying myself, I'm having some cookies, and rotting my teeth. I will stop that, believe me I will, for now I use the sugar to cheer me up. I rather have some eggs, boiled or in an omelette. I will be eating fish and remember this tim, I'll be munching on spinach, with butter and salt--let's change the butter for ghee, and that will be O.K. I still have 10 minutes out of the 25. I still have so much I need to pour down. This world is confusing, so multilevel thing. I am trying to be a human who fits the right thing. What do I mean? What do I believe? I am using the rithm to keep me mo-mo-mo-moving. I will publish mother's stuff, I will sell it so quick, I am a good merchant and an artist. I will sell my services, for a fair price, no race to the bottom, no running behind. I keep writing. There is no stop. Well, I do sip mate and that means I stop. But not for that long! I am commited to the 25. I develop commitment. I grow the commiting module. I train the executing machine. I clean the stuff in the way, I grease the rails and polish the sand. Yes, sand. The sand is so shiny, so full of light. Thanks to the *autopolish now* command. Asking the spirit of the sand to work in my behalf, is something so covenient and so much fun. The time is running, and I am sitting here... I wonder what I did to get so much money... I know Martu misses me, I miss her too. I know I will heal, I am healing right now. I have found all the tools, and now some psychologyst help, I feel like this is a time to remember. Life is such a complicated thing, so full of experience, so full of pain, misunderstanding, trust and care. There is so much love out there, and so much burning babies, so many lonely mothers an children who are hurt. I wanted to break the chain, I wanted to be a good boy then, I did so many foolish things, but always trying to be my best. There have been mistakes. There has been loneliness. There has been distrust, cold and hunger.

---