#PáginasDiarias 

Buenos... ¿Días? Ya son las 12:46. Estoy sentado en éste cuarto. Es el cuarto donde dí sal a mi hermanito. Donde vivivieron mi madre y Osvaldo. Donde mi hermano descurbrió sus manos. Donde alguna vez le grité, lo ahorqué, intenté enseñarle como comportarse... El cuarto donde me masturbé por años. El cuarto donde leí Harry Potter, regalo de mi mamá. Estoy en un lugar muy cargado de historias que no están resueltas. Cargado de culpa. Algo de añoranza, y compasión por quien fuí entonces, por lo que intentaba hacer, por los errores cometidos, y los aciertos. ¿Un acierto? Leer *Corazón*, por Edmundo D'Amicis. Me hizo bien, me acompañó y me enseñó buenos valores para la vida. Vamos, nada de detenerse. Éstas son las *Morning Pages*. Vamos. Hay tanto, tanto, tanto que contar. Y tanto que entender. Y no sé si éste es el momento para andar removiendo éstas historias. Al menos no desde ése punto. Hagámoslo desde acá, desde el presente. En el presente hay incendios, tormentas de viento, y un sol radiante que intenta iluminarlo todo. Pongamos ante sus ojos algún asunto, veamos que nos revela. A ver... No tengo trabajo. Busco trabajo. No sé si quiero un trabajo. Quiero dinero para sostenerme y para poder contribuír a mi familia y amigos. Quiero dejar de sentirme un vagabundo, inútil, lleno de vergüenza. Quiero entender qué fuerzas se disputan el control de mi atención. Los días no son ni más cortos ni más largos que lo habitual, mas hay días tan vacíos de progreso aparente, que se sienten cortísimos, y desperdiciados. Las acciones más habituales en mis días están siendo masturbarme, comer pan, tomar mate, dormir, jugar WIII entre una y tres horas cada día, fumar marihuana una o dos veces por día, leer *On Writing Well*, ver vídeos acerca de los traumas de la infancia y cómo tratarlos, pensar en prepararme para la primera sesión de terapia, *fence off* los pensamientos y recuerdos dolorosos, ver videos sobre el negocio de traducción, ver videos sobre el negocio de escribir copy, ver videos sobre escribir artículos informativos, escuchar podcast acerca de negocios... Dios, éso es un montón. Y hay más. Porque por un lado busco algún modo de ganar dinero, por otro me siento terrible por no aportar nada a la casa--aunque mi madre insiste en que es ella quien se siente mal por no tener nada que darme--, y pienso en todos los arreglos que quería hacer y que no sé cuándo haré. Me quedan dos semanas y cuatro días. Y el próximo miércoles hay terapia. Y necesito estar listo. Necesito poner en palabras lo que creo que va a pasar, lo que creo que hay que evitar, lo que deseo lograr. Y el trabajo, Dios, el trabajo. No quiero un trabajo. Quiero un negocio. Quiero ser yo, y ganar dinero por hacer lo que yo hago. Quiero que se me pague por pensar, por escribir, por diseñar. No quiero participar de la carrera por un trabajo que pague bien a cambio de mi tiempo. No quiero vender mi tiempo. Tengo 30 años. Quiero mostrarle a mi familia y amigos que progreso y puedo mantenerme sólo, y cultivar mi camino personal... pero sin mentir. Demonios. Sin mentir.

---
*14:23* I keep escaping. Time flows. The sun will get behind me in no time, and soon after that, night will fall.

So what? So what? What is this game I am playing?

It is called *The Life of Lorenzo*. It is a bit of a tragedy, but actually a comedy. This person is trying to sustain himself with truth. Can truth sustain a life? Can truth sustain *his* life? He wants to study in his terms. He does not want to study because a company will not take him if he doesn't have a degree. He wants skill and knowledge and personality to be his credentials. But, does he have skill? Does he have knowledge? He does not know. He believes he has something, but he is not sure about what it is. And he for sure does not know algebra. He does not know coding. He does not know grammar. But he knows how to google, barely, but enough to get the information he needs if he knows what to ask.

He loves speaking, and writing. He thinks he could work writing articles in subjects of his interest, and that way both study *and* make a living. He seems convinced that such plan might work. He believes himself to have a way with words, and though he is aware of his ignorance, he is also commited to do his best to offer something he himself would appreciate. For instance, many a time he has found an informative article on a subject he was trying to understand, and spotted typos, or a bunch of clichés, sudden ends without any real thought on the matter... This betrays the writer as somebody who writes *merely* to get some trafic, carless for the reader. He believes he can write better than that. If somebody got paid for that, he can do better. But he does not dare act on that. He believes he is so ignorant, nobody will like what he writes. He also thinks his ignorance is not so big. That he does have some knowledge of value, that can be shared and put to the service of society. But it so so tangled... He also seeks to learn, to visit university and get to know the place. He wants to sit in a class and see what it is like. But he knows such thoughts carry with them the wish to be an example of an autodidactic person, and maybe he does need help. But, who said an autodidact needs no help?

Also, there in an issue of focus. The path he wishes to walk requires great focus and commitment. He has made some big choices already, and those need to be considered.

He chose to have a mate. He chose monogamy. He is willing to sacrifice all possible partners for this one. He understands it might fail, his partner might some day desire to go a different way, without him. Still, he choses to act as if she is forever. She loves him, and will do what she can to help him. His suffering is her suffering. So, if he puts himself in undue danger, that concerns them both.

*16:15*. I am cooking. Pasta, and beans. Thanks to mom, who provides the food and the gas and the house... I feel bad. I cried a bit while washing the dishes. I had entered the kitchen at 15 or something, and saw signs my sibling ate bread and some tea or mate cocido. No signs of cooking. Yesterday, nobody cooked. Today at noon I went to the kitchen to get some bread and something warm to drink. I saw a pot with rice, rice I cooked like three days ago. I felt terrified that anyone would be eating that. Where was it? And the pot was clean yesterday, so this happened yesterday night. I hope nobody gets sick. I fed the remains to the dog, and did the dishes. I thought if I did not cook, nobody would cook. There is food, there is a package of pasta, some potatoes, lentils. Maybe they don't have much imagination. Maybe they do not want to cook. But I felt sad. And I cooked. And now, I am a wreck, and don't understand why.

Maybe I am kind of dumb. Or, maybe I have been dumbed down from malnutrition? Lack of water? I have not been drinking much water, not even a glass a day.